The Graphical Interface for SHOP2
developed by: John Shin



1. Introduction

The purpose of the graphical user interface (GUI) for SHOP2 is to give
the user a visual representation of the planning process by
dynamically displaying the decomposition tree.  The GUI also keeps
track of the methods that were used to decompose every task, the
preconditions that had to be met prior to decomposition, and the
current state of the world at each step of the planning process.  The
decomposition tree consists of yellow and blue nodes which represent
ordered and unordered tasks respectively, and these nodes change in
size from small to large as they are visited.  Ordered nodes are
displayed on-screen from top to bottom in accordance with their
ordering constraint.

2. Usage

In order to use the GUI, copy and paste all the files and folders
associated with the GUI into the directory that contains the Java
Interface for SHOP2 (ji4shop2 in the distribution).  The GUI directory
conains a folder named "images" and the files extraFile.lisp,
Main.java, MyQuery.java, and SHOP2GUI.java.  Then, open the file named
Main.java and supply the following information where noted:

	1) The domain filename
	2) The name of the goal task 
	3) The state atoms in the following format:
		String[] facts = {
			"(at A B)",
			"(load B C)",
			...
			"(on C D)"		
	    };

To run the GUI, compile all the files (Main.java, MyQuery.java,
SHOP2GUI.java) and then type "java Main" at the command prompt.  Be
sure to specify the location of your lisp interpreter and the
shop2.lisp file in the file config.txt, which comes with the Java
Interface for SHOP2.
