# -*- mode:org; -*-

* Introduction

Here we present a preliminary design for implementing enhanced plan trees for
SHOP2.  These aim to provide not just a derivation tree for the plan (as with
the original plan trees in SHOP2), but also provide traceability of
preconditions (consumers) to enabling actions (establishers).  Initially, these
trees will only be built in explicit-state search.  They may be back-ported to
conventional SHOP2 at a later date.  Note that plan /tree/ is actually a
misnomer -- with the dependency information included, these are actually DAGs.

* Tree structures

** tree nodes

Tree nodes are being put into their own package, to avoid name collisions with
the ones already in SHOP2.  A little cumbersome, but should be ok:
#+BEGIN_SRC common-lisp
(defstruct tree-node
  task
  dependencies
  )

(defstruct (primitive-tree-node (:include tree-node))
  )

(defstruct (complex-tree-node (:include tree-node))
  children
  )

#+END_SRC

** dependencies
 The dependency structures will look like this:
 #+BEGIN_SRC common-lisp
 (defstruct dependency
   establisher
   consumer
   proposition
  )
 #+END_SRC

* Backtracking

Whenever we add one or more dependency records, we must push onto the backtrack
stack a structure that will enable removing them.  Alternatively, since we will
only add dependency records when we are adding a new plan tree node, we could
simply remove all the dependencies on a plan-tree node whenever we backtrack to
remove that node from the plan.  That seems simpler and more elegant.

* Limitations

** Handling axioms

 The initial design does not record axioms used to prove non-primitive literals.
 Instead, we only record primitive literals in the dependencies.  The assumption
 is that if we cannot re-establish a clobbered primitive literal, we will need to
 re-examine the preconditions from scratch, which involves re-evaluating all the
 axioms, so there's no need to record intermediate steps.

** Unordered task networks

 The initial design does not handle unordered task networks, because doing so
 would require re-ordering the children of a complex-tree-node based on which
 ordering is chosen.

** Iteration tasks

 We have a number of cases where we have tasks like "visit all the targets," and
 these tasks will have "all the targets" as their preconditions.  But note that
 if a target goes away, it doesn't break "visit all the targets." So we need to
 think about what it means to retrieve the extent of a set.

* Build process

We will build the tree top-down, in contrast to the original SHOP2 plan trees,
which were built bottom-up, after the entire plan was completed.  We will add
the nodes to the tree at the point where method expansions are made and
primitive operators are inserted into the plan.

* Implementation details 

** Special variables

 At the expense of having uglier code, I am inclined to use a pair of special
 variables -- =*literals*= and =*establishers*= -- that we can push onto when we
 are retrieving atoms from the state.  This will avoid having to completely
 change the call and return protocols for the theorem-prover.

 The theorem-prover will have an additional special variable --
 =*record-dependencies-p*= -- that defaults to NIL, and is exported from the
 theorem-prover library.  This is the boolean that we will check when deciding
 whether to record.  This is simpler than having the two accumulator special
 variables somehow have values that signaled that they are not in use.

** Static predicates

 It would be nice to have SHOP2 recognize static predicates so that we don't
 need to record dependencies on unchanging literals.  Right now, the way we use
 =!!ASSERT= and =!!DELETE= militates against this, since we can't simply look at
 the normal operators and see what predicates they could change.  One thing we
 could do, that's akin to what Prologs do, is infer static predicates based on
 normal operators /and/ a =DYNAMIC= declaration.  If we are going to do this,  I
 think we should check and raise an error if we ever try to change a fluent
 whose predicate isn't recorded as dynamic (either inferred or user-specified).

** Extracting the establishers

 One problem is that currently the establishers are recorded based on state
 tags, but the state tags don't correlate with primitive operators.  We'll need
 to do something like record an association of tags with operators, which will
 need to be done in =APPLY-OPERATOR= and =APPLY-ACTION= (PDDL actions).

* Theorem-prover modifications

If we use the special variables, then the only modifications that are necessary
come when we are retrieving atoms from a state.  I believe that this can be
limited to =DO-CONJUNCT-FROM-ATOMS=.  Unfortunately, despite the fact that this
function seems to do only one conjunct, in fact it recursively tries to prove
all the remaining goals after that.  Accordingly, we have to deal with
backtracking if the recursive queries fail.  Another complication is extracting
the /latest/ establisher of a fact from the state.  The current state objects
record only the /first/ establisher.

